git --version

Displays the currently installed Git version on your computer. It is commonly used to verify that Git is installed correctly and to check which version you are using.

git config --global user.name "Your Name"

Sets the username that Git will attach to all commits you create. This name appears in the commit history and identifies the author of the changes.

git config --global user.email "you@example.com"

Sets the email address associated with your commits. Platforms like GitHub use this email to connect commits to your account.

git config --list

Shows all Git configuration settings currently active on your system, including your username, email, default editor, and other preferences.

git init

Creates a new Git repository in the current folder. After running this command, Git begins tracking changes inside the project.

git clone <url>

Downloads a complete copy of an existing remote repository from GitHub or another Git server to your local machine.

git status

Displays the current state of the repository, including modified files, staged files, untracked files, and the current branch.

git add <file>

Adds a specific file to the staging area. Only staged files will be included in the next commit.

git add .

Adds all new, modified, and deleted files in the current project to the staging area at once.

git commit -m "message"

Creates a new commit containing all staged changes. The message should clearly describe what changes were made.

git log

Shows the complete commit history of the repository, including commit IDs, authors, dates, and commit messages.

git log --oneline

Shows a simplified version of the commit history, displaying one commit per line for easier reading.

git diff

Displays the exact differences between your current files and the last committed version before the changes are staged.

git diff --staged

Shows the differences between the staged files and the most recent commit, allowing you to review what will be committed.

git restore <file>

Discards all uncommitted changes in a file and restores it to the state of the last commit.

git restore --staged <file>

Removes a file from the staging area without deleting the modifications you made to it.

git rm <file>

Deletes a file from the project and stages that deletion so it can be recorded in the next commit.

git mv old.txt new.txt

Renames or moves a file while allowing Git to track the change properly.

git branch

Lists all local branches in the repository and indicates the branch you are currently using.

git branch <name>

Creates a new branch without switching to it. This is useful for developing new features separately.

git checkout <branch>

Switches your working directory to another branch so you can work on a different version of the project.

git checkout -b <name>

Creates a new branch and immediately switches to it in a single command.

git switch <branch>

A modern alternative to git checkout for switching between branches.

git switch -c <name>

Creates a new branch and switches to it using the modern branch management syntax.

git merge <branch>

Combines the changes from another branch into the current branch. This is commonly used when finishing a feature branch.

git branch -d <name>

Deletes a branch that is no longer needed, usually after it has been merged.

git remote -v

Displays all remote repositories connected to the project and their URLs.

git remote add origin <url>

Connects the local repository to a remote repository, usually hosted on GitHub.

git push origin main

Uploads local commits from the main branch to the remote repository.

git pull origin main

Downloads the latest changes from the remote repository and automatically merges them into the current branch.

git fetch

Downloads updates from the remote repository without merging them. This allows you to inspect changes before integrating them.

git reset --soft HEAD~1

Removes the latest commit while keeping all changes staged and ready for another commit.

git reset --mixed HEAD~1

Removes the latest commit and unstages the changes, while keeping the actual file modifications.

git reset --hard HEAD~1

Removes the latest commit and permanently deletes all associated changes from your working directory.

git stash

Temporarily saves uncommitted changes and cleans the working directory so you can switch tasks or branches safely.

git stash pop

Restores the most recently stashed changes and removes them from the stash list.

git tag <name>

Creates a tag for a specific commit. Tags are commonly used to mark releases such as v1.0 or v2.0.

git help <command>

Opens the official documentation for a specific Git command and displays its syntax, options, and usage examples.